###
Law
N° 20/2009 of 29/07/2009 establishing the National Land Centre (NLC) and determining its responsiblities, functioning, organization and competence
official gazette n° 31 of 03/8/2009
RDB
###
Article 1 establishment of the centre
This Law shall establish the National Land Centre abbreviated as “NLC” and determine its organization, functioning and competence. NLC shall fall within the category of public institutions which are entrusted with regulatory responsibilities and promotion of economic and social activities as well as other activities of general interest. NLC shall have legal personality, administrative and financial autonomy and shall be governed in accordance with Laws governing organs of public service. O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009
Article 2 head office of nlc
The head office of NLC shall be located in the City of Kigali, capital city of the Republic of Rwanda. It may be transferred elsewhere on the Rwandan territory where deemed necessary. NLC shall have branches responsible for land management. icyicaro A Presidential Order shall determine the place of location of head offices of such branches.
Article 3 definitions of terms
For the purposes of this Law, the terms below shall have the following meanings: 1° Geographic Information System (GIS) : a system for displaying and analyzing data which are spatially referenced to the Earth; 2° Global Positioning System (GPS): a satellite-based navigational system allowing the determination of the position of objects on the earth's surface; O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 3° Remote Sensing: the technique of obtaining data or information about the environment and the land cover by using photographs or images taken from aircrafts or satellites; 4° Hydrographic survey: process of gathering information about navigable waters, such as lakes and rivers, for the purposes of safe navigation of vessels; 5° Topographic Survey: a survey that measures the elevation of points on a particular piece of land and presents them as contours on a topographic map; 6° Land Survey: a technique of measuring the actual physical extent of a parcel of land or a property, typically witnessed by monuments or markers set into the ground, ( trees, piled cornerstones, piled, concrete stones or other types of demarcating feature) put in place no the basis of the date gathered; 7° Multipurpose Cadastre: integrated land information system containing legal information in a common and accurate reference framework; O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 8° Geodetic Survey: a high accurate survey that establishes a network of landmarks on the earth surface used as a reference to determine and to re-define a plot location; 9° Cadastral Map: a map showing the boundaries of the subdivisions of land for purposes of describing and recording ownership and taxation; 10° Topographic Map: a map that represents the relief and essential physical phenomenon, natural and artificial, observed on a territory; 11° Thematic Map: a map depicting selected kinds of information relating to one or more specific themes of earth surface; 12° Land Parcel: portion of land with boundaries and use generally known and has some implications on land ownership; O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 13° Geodesy: the science of measuring the shape and size of the earth, together with the determination of the exact position of particular points on its surface by taking the Earth‟s curvature into account; 14° Cadastre: a methodically arranged public inventory of data concerning all legal land objects in a territory of a country or a region, based on a survey of their boundaries by indicating, for each different object, its nature, its area, its value, the rights and obligations associated to it as well as the owner; 15° National Geodetic Network: a national network of triangular polygons which are measured exactly by techniques of terrestrial surveying or by satellite geodesy, and determine precisely landmarks that are critical for land survey, cadastral survey and mapping;
Article 4 nlc technical equipment
NLC shall be equipped with basic technical equipment to facilitate it in identifying and O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 analyzing geographical information system (GIS) through teledetection system as well as through global positioning sytem technology and remote sensing system (GPS). CHAPTER II: RESPONSIBILITIES AND POWERS OF NLC
Article 5 responsibilities of nlc
izi NLC shall have responsibilities: NLC shall be the organ responsible for overall management and coordination of all activities related to land administration, land use planning and management. inshingano NLC shall particularly have the following responsibilities: 1° to participate in preparation of policy and strategies in matters related to landmanagement and use in Rwanda; 2° to supervise all land-related matters and represent the State in matters relating to O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 supervision and monitoring issues related to land management in Rwanda; 3° to execute or cause to be executed geodetic, topographic, hydrographic and cadastral surveys in relation to land and water resources; 4° 5° 6° 7° to prepare, to disseminate and to publish various maps and masterplans relating to land management using the most appropriate scales; to establish and to maintain a national geodetic network control system; to establish and to update basic topographic maps and thematic maps; to define standards for land administration, land surveys, the geo- information, spatial information and land information data collection and all cartographic representations of geographic features, national spatial data infrastructure and others that may be defined by the National Land Commission; O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 8° to provide access to land information, including land survey records, to any natural or legal person at a fee to be determined by the National Land Commission; 9° to coordinate all land information network for both national and District land registration systems; 10° to play a basic role in determining and commissioning aerial photography, its rectification and the production of photomap products; 11° to prepare guidelines, principles, instructions and planification on land use throughout the country; 12° to advise and provide support to District Land Bureaux in the implementation of the National Land Policy and the Organic Law determining the use and management of land in Rwanda; 13° to receive and evaluate proposals to O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 purchase or lease private state-owned land and to issue, on behalf of the Government, long term leases and permits to occupy on such lands in accordance with the Organic Law determining the use and management of land in Rwanda; 14° to monitor and to enforce the execution of terms of conditions of land lease and to recommend amendments of the terms of the contract referred to in item 13 of this article; 15° to administer supporting revenue documents and account for all taxes, rents and other monies payable in respect of the sale and lease of land as may be prescribed by particular laws; 16° to undertake all State land valuation for the purposes of their classification for sale, lease or land cession; 17° to prepare for the National Land Centre a fair and just procedure to implement and set standards for the effective administration of land; O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 18° to develop and to manage efficiently a national land database system; 19° to participate in policy formulation and specifications for the regular acquisition of aerial imagery from aircraft and satellites for standard mapping purposes; 20° to initiate studies and formulate policy recommendations on the feasibility of specific land development projects; 21°to cooperate with other agencies and international organizations which have a close relationship with land use and management practices; 22° to carry out an inventory of all land resources in the country, their quality and their use, and act as the keeper and custodian of all national maps, aerial photomaps collections, and their databases; 23°to keep and to maintain the National Land Registry as a spatial database of land registration and the rights on land; O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 24° to act as an organ to resolve conflicts relating to land use and management which were not resolved by relevant authorities at the District or City of Kigali levels which were referred by appropriate authorities; 25° without prejudice to provisions of specific laws relating to Cities and the related areas, to prepare policies master plans of the use of land at the national or District level.
Article 6 powers of nlc
NLC has the following powers in order to fulfill its responsibilities: 1° to monitor, organize and grant rights to all functional bodies involved in land management, land use planning and land information management; 2° to collect all land information in order O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 to develop a land related data base; 3° to ensure effective enforcement of land laws and regulations. Specifically, NLC has powers to conduct inspection, to suspend and to demolish constructions that do not conform to designated land uses or suppress regulations on use and management of land. For that purpose, the Minister in charge of Justice may appoint NLC employees to act as Judicial Police Officers upon request of the Minister in charge of lands. 4° to issue technical instructions related to land administration and management to District Land Bureaux; 5° to check and to approve surveys and geo-referenced data, various maps and to approve land surveys carried out; 6° to seek support from public or private organs with which NLC has signed contracts, using a document bearing its ordinary logo; O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 7° to act as a recognized organ to sell various maps and related data, to facilitate individuals conducting land surveys and design various maps at a price determined by the National Land Commission. CHAPTER
Article 7 supervising authority of nlc and contract of performance
Such a contract shall be valid for a period equal to the term of office of the Board members and shall be signed by the Chairperson of the Board of Directors and the Minister supervising NLC. O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009
Article 8 contents of the contract of performance
The contract referred to in article 7 of this Law shall inter alia specify the following details: 1° responsibilities of Directors; 2° expected results of NLC; 3° source of the property of NLC, its functioning and regular auditing procedures.
Article 9 organs of nlc
NLC shall comprise the following two (2) organs: 1° the Board of Directors; 2° the Management. O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 Section One: Board of Directors
Article 10 management body
The Board of Directors shall be the supreme management and decision-making body of NLC. It shall have full powers and responsibilities to manage the property of NLC in order to fulfil its responsibilities. An Order of the Prime Minister shall appoint seven (7) members of the Board of Directors including the Chairperson and the Deputy Chairperson. At least thirty (30%) of the members of the Board of Directors shall be women. Members of the Board of Directors shall have a mandate of three (3) years renewable only once.
Article 11 responsibilities of nlc board of directors
NLC Board of Directors shall have the following responsibilities: O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 1° to provide the strategic vision and the plan of action of NLC; 2° to adopt the draft internal rules and regulations of NLC which shall be approved by an Order of the Minister in charge of lands; 3° to adopt the annual draft budget proposal before it is transmitted to relevant authorities; 4° to assess the performance of NLC against the plan of action and the budget; 5° to approve the activity report and the report on the use of the property for the previous year; 6° to monitor the performance of the Management and personnel of NLC.
Article 12 convening of board of directors and mode of taking decisions
NLC Board of Directors shall meet once a term in an ordinary session and whenever necessary in an extraordinary session. I shall be invited by the Chairperson or his/her Deputy, when the Chairperson is absent, upon their initiative or upon request by one-third (1/3) of the Board members. O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 The invitation shall be submitted in writing to Board members at least fifteen (15) days before the meeting is held. Items to be examined by the Board meeting in the first quarter of the year shall include approval of the activity report and the report on the use of the property for the previous year; in the third quarter, items of shall include examination of the draft annual budget and action plan of the following year. The Board of Directors shall quarterly consider the financial and activity reports relating to the previous quarter for submission to the Minister supervising NLC. The mode for holding meetings and taking decisions shall be prescribed in the internal rules and regulations of NLC. O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009
Article 13 invitation of a resourceful person to the board of directors meetings
The Board of Directors may invite to its meetings any person from whom it may seek advice on a certain issue on the agenda. The invitee shall not be allowed to vote and to follow debates on other issues on the agenda.
Article 14 resolutions and minutes of the board of directors meeting
The Board resolutions shall be signed by its members as soon as the meeting ends and a copy thereof shall be sent to the Minister supervising NLC within five (5) days for his/her views and opinions within fifteen (15) days from its receipt. After this period with no reaction from the Minister, the resolutions shall be deemed definitively approved. Minutes of the Board meeting shall be jointly signed by the Chairperson and its rapporteur and submitted to its next O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 meeting for approval. A copy of the minutes shall be sent to the Minister supervising NLC within fifteen (15) days from the day of its approval.
Article 15 board of directors members sitting allowances
Members of the Board of Directors shall receive a sitting allowance to be determined by a Presidential Order.
Article 16 restrictions to board of directors members and to companies in which they hold shares
Members of the Board of Directors, whether individually or companies in which they hold shares, shall not be allowed to perform any activity remunerated by NLC or to bid for NLC contracts. O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009
Article 17 grounds for loss of board of directors membership
Membership to the Board of Directors shall be lost in either of these cases: 1° the mandate expires; 2° he / she resigns through writing; 3° he / she is no longer able to perform his / her duties due to physical or mental disability certified by an authorized medical doctor; itajyanye 4° he / she has been definitively sentenced to a term of imprisonment equal to or exceeding six (6) months with no suspension of the sentence; 5° he / she is absent in meetings for three (3) consecutive times in a year with no sound reasons; 6° it is clear that he / she no longer fulfils the requirements considered at the time of his / her appointment to the Board of Directors; 7° he / she demonstrates behaviours contrary to his or her responsibilities; 8° he / she jeopardizes the interests of NLC; O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 9° he / she has confessed and pleaded guilty of the crime of genocide; 10° he / she demonstrates behaviours showing genocide ideology; 11° he / she dies. The Minister supervising NLC shall indicate in a report to competent organs that one of the Board members is not worth its membership or he / she is no longer in his / her position in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph. Where one of the members of the Board of Directors loses his or her membership before the expiration of his / her mandate, competent authorities shall appoint his / her substitute. The appointee shall complete the remaining term of office. Section 2: Management
Article 18 nlc management
The daily management of NLC shall be entrusted to the Director who is also the Registrar of Land Titles appointed by a Presidential Order. The Director shall have executive powers. O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 He / she shall coordinate and direct daily activities of NLC and shall be answerable to the Board of Directors for the implementation of NLC activities. A Presidential Order shall appoint a Deputy Director of NLC who assists and replaces the Director in his / her absence except for the land title registration duties. There shall be signed a contract of performance between the NLC management and the Board of Directors determining requirements of each party in order to fulfill the mission of NLC. The Director responsible for: ku nzego 1° issuing work instructions for NLC departments and branches; 2° preparing and submitting to NLC Board of Directors the draft budget proposal for the following year and the financial report of the previous year; 3° monitoring the use of the budget and O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 the management of NLC property ; 4° making follow-up on the recruitment and performance of NLC personnel in accordance with the Law; 5° submitting, at least once quarterly, to the National Land Commission a progress report on NLC‟s activities; 6° to serve as a legal representative of NLC; 7° attending the Board meetings and acting as rapporteur. He / she may give views but shall have no voting rights. The Director shall not attend meetings that debate on issues that concern him / her. In that case, the Board of Directors shall elect from among itself a rapporteur. The Deputy Director of NLC shall assist the Director in administrative and legal matters and in such other duties as provided for by the internal rules and regulations. A Presidential Order shall appoint a Deputy Registrar of Land Titles who heads each branch. O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009
Article 19 specific responsibilities of the director as registrar of land titles
inshingano The Director of NLC shall have following specific responsibilities: 1° to keep land titles for the entire national territory; 2° to coordinate activities and monitor the performance of Deputy Registrars of Land Titles; 3° to issue certificates for lands provided for in articles 12, 15 and 72 of Organic Law n° 08/2005 of 14/07/2005 determining the use and management of land in Rwanda; 4° to designate one from among Deputy Registrars of Land Titles to replace him / her in case of his / her impediment for a period exceeding fifteen(15) days; 5° to designate a Deputy Registrar of Land Titles to support any other Deputy Registrar in another jurisdiction, if need arises. O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009
Article 20 responsibilities of the deputy registrar of land titles
The registration of land titles in NLC branches shall be done by Deputy Registrars of Land Titles. gihamya In particular, the Deputy Registrar of Land Titles shall have the following responsibilities in his / her jurisdiction: 1° to sign land titles and long-term land lease contracts; 2° to approve the final land disposal ; 3° to register and remove from the register security on immovable property with title deeds; 4° to approve the transfer of rights to immovable property; 5° to transfer security; 6° to approve loss of land title.
Article 21 benefits for the director and staff members of nlc
Benefits for the Director and staff members O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 of NLC shall be determined in accordance with legal provisions governing remuneration of staff members of public institutions.
Article 22 organizational structure and job descriptions of nlc
The organizational structure and job description of NLC shall be determined by an Order of the Prime Minister upon proposal by the Minister supervising NLC, after consultation with the Board of Directors. NLC staff members shall be governed by the General statutes for Rwanda Public Service. CHAPTER V: PROPERTY AND FINANCE OF NLC
Article 23 composition and source of nlc property
cyangwa NLC shall derive its property from the following: 1° State budget allocations; 2° Revenue from services rendered ; 3° Government or donor grants; O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 4° donations and bequests.
Article 24 use, management and audit of property of nlc
Use, management and audit of NLC property shall be carried out in accordance with relevant laws. NLC internal audit department shall submit a report to the Board of Directors with a copy to the Director of NLC.
Article 25 budget of nlc
The budget of NLC shall be approved and managed in accordance with relevant Laws. CHAPTER VI: TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 26 powers transferred to nlc
Upon publication of this Law in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Rwanda, land O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009 management-related functions and other functions related to land use and management that are entrusted to various public entities are hereby transferred to NLC. Functions, equipment, land registers, various maps and related data as well as other relevant administrative documents in public entities referred to in the preceding paragraph shall also be transferred to the NLC. rigena An Order of the Prime Minister shall determine what to be transferred to NLC.
Article 27 drafting, consideration and adoption of this law
This Law was drafted in English, considered and adopted in Kinyarwanda.
Article 28 repealing of provisions
All prior legal provisions inconsistent with this Law are hereby repealed. O.G. n° 31 of 03/8/2009
Article 29 commencement
This Law shall come into force on the day of its publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Rwanda.
