###
Law
LAW N° 45/2015 OF 15/10/2015 ESTABLISHING THE GISHWATI - MUKURA NATIONAL PARK
Official Gazette n° 05 of 01/02/2016 
agency
###
Article 1 Purpose of this Law
This Law establishes the Gishwati-Mukura National Park. It also determines its boundaries, surface and buffer zone.
Article 2  Definitions of terms
For the pupose of this Law, the following terms shall defined as follows: 1° Buffer zone: The area situated between the Park boundaries and the land aimed for other activitiesthatis created with the purpose of protecting natural forest. 2° GPS (Global Positioning System): A satellite-based navigation system that provides geographic coordinates: Longitude East, Latitude South, and Altitude of Rwanda on the earth.In this Law, the GPS gives the position of Official Gazette n° 05 of 01/02/2016 Gishwati-Mukura National Park in Universal Transverse Mercator-International Terrestrial Reference Frame (UTM-ITRF 2005) in meters, and on the map in degrees, minutes and seconds. 3° Park: Anatural forest area reserved for tourism, biodiversity and environmental research as well as other activities related to the protection of biodiversity and environment.
Article 3 Establishment of the Gishwati-Mukura National Park 
The Gishwati-Mukura National Parkis situated in Rutsiro and Ngororero Districts, in the Western Province of the Republic of Rwanda. The Gishwati-Mukura National Park consists of Gishwati reserve with an area of one thousand five hundred seventy hectares (1,570Ha) and the Mukura reserve with an area of one thousand nine hundred eighty eight hectares (1,988 Ha); the total area is three thousand five hundred fifty eight hectares (3,558Ha). Boundaries of Gishwati-Mukura National Park are described in Annex I of this Law.
Article 4 Map of Gishwati-Mukura National Park 
The map of Gishwati-Mukura National Park and its buffer zone is in Annex III of this Law.
Article 5 Establishment of the buffer zone 
There is hereby established a buffer zone for Gishwati-Mukura National Park. The total surface of the buffer zone is nine hundred sixty two hectares (962 Ha) of which two hundred sixty six hectares (266 Ha) are for Gishwati buffer zone and six hundred ninety six hectares (696 Ha) are for Mukura buffer zone. Boundaries of the buffer zone of Gishwati- Mukura National Park are described in Annex II of this Law.
Article 6 Management of Gishwati-Mukura 
The Gishwati-Mukura National Park shall be managed by the authority in charge of National Official Gazette n° 05 of 01/02/2016 Parks. The buffer zone of Gishwati-Mukura National Park shall be managed in accordance with lawsgoverning forests, land and environment.
Article 7 Drafting, adoption of this law   
This Law was drafted, considered and adopted in Kinyarwanda.
Article 8 Repealing provision 
The Order nº 52/114 of 25 October 1951 establishing a forestry reserve in Gisenyi territory as well as all other prior legal provisions contrary to this Law are hereby repealed.
Article 9 Commencement
This Law shall come into force on the date of its publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Rwanda. Kigali, on 15/10/2015