###
Law
ORDER N° 006/2016 OF 08/01/2016 DETERMINING CURRICULUM, TEACHING HOURS AND THE LANGUAGE OF INSTRUCTION IN PRIMARY, SECONDARY AND SPECIALIZED SCHOOLS
MINISTERIAL ORDER N° 006/2016 OF 08/01/2016 DETERMINING CURRICULUM, TEACHING HOURS AND THE LANGUAGE OF INSTRUCTION IN PRIMARY, SECONDARY AND SPECIALIZED SCHOOLS
Official Gazette nᵒ 03 of 18/01/2016 
agency
###
Article 1 Purpose of this Order 
his Order determines curriculum, teaching hours and language of instruction in primary, secondary and specialized schools.
Article 2 Curriculum  and teaching hours in primary and secondary schools 
Curriculum and teaching hours in primary schools shall be found in appendix I of this Order. Curriculum and teaching hours in secondary schools shall be found in appendix II of this Order.
Article 3 Curriculum and teaching  hours  in specialized schools 
Persons with disabilities who cannot follow their education with other learners shall follow specific curriculum and teaching hours provided for by the Rwanda Education Board (REB) in consideration of the nature of their disability. When persons with disabilities can follow their education with other learners, they shall follow the curriculum and teaching hours provided for those other learners, and facilitated to acquire the appropriate learning materials.
Article 4 Language of instruction in the first cycle of primary education 
In the first cycle of primary education, all subjects except English language shall be taught in Kinyarwanda.
Article 5 Language of instruction in the second cycle of primary education 
In the second cycle of primary education, all subjects, except Kinyarwanda and French languages shall be taught in English.
Article 6 Language of secondary schools 
All subjects in the secondary schools shall be taught in English, except Kinyarwanda, French and Swahili languages.
Article 7 Language of specialized schools 
Language of instruction of persons with disabilities who can follow their education with other learners shall be the same as that of the respective education cycle. Language of instruction of persons with disabilities who cannot follow their education with other learners shall be determined by the Rwanda Education Board (REB) in consideration of the nature of their disability.
Article 8 Repealing provision 
All prior provisions contrary to this Order are hereby repealed.
Article 9 Commencement 
This Order shall come into force on the date of its publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Rwanda. Kigali, on 08/01/2016 