###
Ministerial order
MINISTERIAL ORDER N° 002/2016 OF 08/01/2016 DETERMINING THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF SCHOOL MANAGEMENT BOARD MEMBERS
Official Gazette nᵒ 03 of 18/01/2016
agency
###
Article 1 Purpose of this order 
This Order determines the responsibilities of management board members of a nursery, primary or secondary school. It also deteterimes other school authorities depending on the category of the school and the number of students. 
Article 2 General responsibility of the Headmaster  
In general, the Headmaster shall be responsible for all academic and extra curricula activities all the time.
Article 3 Responsibilities of the Headmaster at administrative level 
In relation to administratiion, the Headmaster’s responsibilities shall be: 1° to ensure respect of laws, orders and regulations in force; 2° to prepare rules and regulations in accordance with the school legislation in force; Orders, Instructions and specific conventions recognized by the State; 3° to ensure professional leadership; 4° to supervise and coordinate elaboration of the school action plan; 5° to coordinate school activities; 6° to keep school diary; Official Gazette nᵒ 03 of 18/01/2016 7° to ensure order and discipline of the school; 8° to ensure respect of the school timetable; 9° to prepare and conduct the meetings of teachers and pupils; 10° to establish personnel files and students’ identification forms; 11° to provide for the replacement of an absent teacher; 12° to identify mistakes done at school, punish those in his/her powers and submit the files to the relevant authorities if the mistake falls in thier powers; 13° to evaluate the staff at first level; 14° to establish school statistics; 15° to write and transmit all required reports.
Article 4 Responsibilities of the Headmaster at pedagogical level 
In relation to pedagogy, the Headmaster must : Official Gazette nᵒ 03 of 18/01/2016 1 º ensure the curriculum ; 2 º assist teachers to deliver courses professionally and motivate students.
Article 5 Responsibilities of the Headmaster at financial level 
In relation to finance, the Headmaster must: 1° organize inventory of all school property; 2° prepare and recommend for approval the school budget; 3° execute the budget according to current procedures and instructions; 4° manage the school property; 5° promote income generating activities; 6° promptly transmit required reports.
Article 6 Responsibilities of the Headmaster at social life level 
In relation to social life, the Headmaster must: Official Gazette nᵒ 03 of 18/01/2016 1° promote good relationships among school administration, students, teachers and other staff; 2° represent the school in its relationship with other parties; 3° promote socio-cultural and economic activities for the school and in the neighbourhood ; 4° serve as a link between teachers, students, parents, the neighbors to the school and other third parties; 5° communicate to parents the behaviors of students; 6° ensure the health, hygiene, and cleanliness within the school and in the neighborhood; 7° ensure the protection and security of people and school property; 8° promote extra-curricula activities and encourage students to participate in sports and cultural activities; 9° communicate necessary information to teachers, parents, students, and other concerned people; 10° play the role of a parent for all students.
Article 7 School categories for purposes of the appointment of school authorities 
Nursery, primary and secondary schools shall be divided into the following three categories: 1° the first category composed of : a. Nursery education b. Primary education c. Nursery and primary education 2° the second category composed of : a. primary and secondary schools with less than seven hundred (700) students; b. secondary schools with less than seven hundred (700) students; Official Gazette nᵒ 03 of 18/01/2016 3° the third category composed of : a. primary and secondary schools with seven hundred (700) students or more ; b. secondary schools with seven hundred (700) students or more ;
Article 8 School authorities  appointed on the basis of school category 
A school in the first category shall have a Headmaster only. A school in the second category shall have the following authorities : 1° Headmaster; 2° Deputy Headmaster studies; 3° Deputy Headmaster discipline; 4° Bursar; 5° Secretary. A school in the third category shall have the following authorities : Official Gazette nᵒ 03 of 18/01/2016 1° Headmaster; 2° Deputy Headmaster studies; 3° Two (2) Deputy Headmasters in charge of discipline; 4° Bursar; 5° Secretary
Article 9 Attributions of Deputy Headmaster in charge of studies 
The Deputy Headmaster in charge of studies shall have the following responsibilities: 1° to prepare the elaboration of timetable ; 2° to supervise the activities of teaching and learning ; 3° to support teachers to aquire and look after teaching materials ; iyo 4° to ensure the interim in the absence of the Headmaster ; 5° to prepare professional training of the teachers.
Article 10 Attributions of Deputy Headmaster in charge of discipline 
The Deputy Headmaster in charge of discipline shall have the following responsibilities: 1° to ensure the students’ discipline ; 2° to supervise activities ; 3° to support students in relation to health.
Article 11 Attributions of school Bursar  
The School bursar shall have the following responsibilities: 1° to manage the heritage and keep books of accouts for the school ; 2° to shop for the school ; 3° to take care of furniture, buildings, land and other property of the school ; 4° to prepare the budget of the school ; 5° to prepare income-generating projects for school; 6° to manage contractual staff of the school.
Article 12 Attributions of the Secretary 
The school Secretary shall have the following responsibilities : 1° to receive, prepare and dispatch letters ; 2° to keep the school documents ; 3° to receive and guide school guests ; 4° to organize Headmaster ; 5° to keep the agenda of activities of Headmater .
Article 13 Repealing provision 
All prior provisions contrary to this Order are hereby repealed. 
Article 14 Commencement 
This Order shall come into force on the date of its publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Rwanda. Kigali, on 08/01/2016