###
Ministerial order
N° 005/2016 OF 08/01/2016 DETERMINING MODALITIES FOR CONDUCTING MEETINGS AND MAKING DECISIONS OF THE SECTOR OR THE DISTRICT EDUCATION COUNCIL
Official Gazette nᵒ 03 of 18/01/2016 
agency
###
Article 1 The purpose of this order
This Order determines the modalities for conducting meetings and making decisions by the Sector Education Council or the District Education Council.
Article 2 Convening of the meeting of the Sector Education Council 
Sector Education Council The ordinary meeting of the Sector Education Council shall be convened and chaired by its President. In case of absence or unavailability of the President, it shall be convened and chaired by the in charge of education in the Sector. It may also be convened upon the request of one- third (1/3) of the Education Council members. The modalities for convening and chairing extraordinary meeting of the Sector Education Council shall be the same as those for the ordinary meeting.
Article 3 Meeting of the Sector Education 
The ordinary meeting of Sector Education Council shall be heldevery quarter to assess the situation of education in the Sector.The Council shall also meet during the long vacation to plan for new school year. The extraordinary meeting of the Sector Education Council shall meet as many times as necessary.
Article 4 Decision-making modalities for the Sector Education Council
The Sector Education Council shall meet and validly deliberate when two thirds (2/3) members are present. In case the quorum is not reached, a second meeting shall be convened within fifteen (15) days for ordinary meeting or three (3) days for extraordinary meeting. In that case, the Sector Education Council shall meet and validly deliberate regardless of the number of participants. For extraordinary sessions of Sector Education Council, the discussions shall focus only on the item on the agenda. The decisions of the Sector Education Council shall betakenby absolute majority votes. In case of equal votes, the chairperson of the meeting shall have a casting vote. The minutes of the Sector Education Council shall be signed by the Chairperson and the Rapporteur of the meeting. The resolutions of the Sector Education Council shall be signed by all present members immediately after the meeting and sent to the Mayor of the District in a period not exceeding five (5) days.
Article 5 Convening of the meeting of the District Education Council 
The ordinary meeting of the District Education Council shall be convened and chaired by its President. In case of absence or unavailability of the President, it shall be convened and chaired by the Vice President. It may also be convened upon the request of the one-third (1/3) of the members of the District Education Council. The modalities for convening and chairing extraordinary meeting of the District Education Council shall be the same as those for the ordinary meeting.
Article 6 Sitting of the District Education Council 
The ordinary meeting of the District Education Council shall sit two (2) times ayearto assess educational situation in the District. The District Education Council shall meet as often as needed in the extraordinary session.
Article 7 Decision-making modalities for the District Education Council 
The District Education Council shall meet and Official Gazette nᵒ 03 of 18/01/2016 validly deliberate when two thirds (2/3) members are present. In case the quorum is not reached, a second meeting shall be convened within fifteen (15) days for ordinary meeting or five (5) days for extraordinary meeting. In that case, the District Education Council shall meet and validly deliberate regardless of the number of participants. For extraordinary sessions of District Education Council, the discussions shall focus only on the item on the agenda. The resolutions of the District Education Council shall be taken by an absolute majority votes. In case of equal votes, the chairperson of the meeting shall have a casting vote. The minutes of the District Education Council meeting shall be signed by the chairperson and the rapporteur of the meeting. The resolutions of the District Education Council shall be signed by all present members immediately after the completion of the meeting and sent to the Minister in charge of education in a period not exceeding five (5) days.
Article 8 Repealing provision 
All prior provisions contrary to this Order are hereby repealed. 
Article 9 Commencement 
This Order shall come into force on the date of its publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Rwanda. Kigali, on 08/01/2016